SPIRE-150: Adds enhancement proposal for integrating OIDC route for Zero Trust Workload Identity Manager (#1824)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/workload-identity-management/oidc-routes-integration.md

## Motivation

The current Zero Trust Workload Identity Manager provides OIDC Discovery Provider functionality through internal cluster services. However, in distributed and multi-cluster environments, external services and workloads running outside the OpenShift cluster need access to OIDC endpoints.

### User Stories

- As a OCP user using Zero Trust Workload Identity Manager, I want OIDC discovery routes to be created and managed by the operator when I enable the `managedRoute` flag so that I can access and verify the jwt tokens from the oidc discovery provider application through an endpoint.

### Goals
   - Create default OpenShift Routes for OIDC discovery endpoints when a `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` resource is deployed
   - Routes are created with consistent naming and labeling conventions
   - Implement reencrypt TLS termination to maintain end-to-end encryption

>    - Integrate with OpenShift's Service CA operator for automatic certificate provisioning and renewal

Reviewer: \- Provide a managed `Route` option for the SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider that automatically exposes OIDC discovery endpoints on the cluster’s default *.apps.<cluster-domain> domain.
\- Allow administrators to disable the managed `Route`, supporting self-managed exposure of the endpoints through OpenShift Routes, ingress, or service mesh gateways.
\- Support attaching labels and annotations to the managed `Route` for better auditing and monitoring.
\- Default the managed Route to use Service CA–issued certificates, ensuring automatic TLS and certificate rotation.
\- Default re-encrypt termination for the managed Route, providing end-to-end TLS with cluster-managed certificates as a stronger security option compared to edge termination, while avoiding the complexity of passthrough.
\- Provide clear status conditions and events so that SREs can quickly diagnose DNS, TLS, or exposure issues.
\- Validation check to reject updates to `Route` termination type or configurations that override usage of ServiceCA operator managed certificates.
\- Allow the use of custom PKI with the default managed Route for TLS connections between clients and the ingress router.

3. **Route Lifecycle Management**: Monitor and manage route status throughout the lifecycle
4. **Certificate Trust Management**: Configure route to trust service certificates issued by Service CA
5. **Default Secure Configuration**: Apply secure defaults for TLS termination and certificate management
6. **Custom Host Support**: Allow administrators to specify custom hostnames for the managed Route via `spec.jwtIssuer` field
7. **Labels and Annotations Management**: Support user-defined labels and annotations on managed Routes through CR specification
8. **Status Conditions and Events**: Provide comprehensive status reporting and event generation for troubleshooting
9. **RBAC Validation**: Validate operator permissions for Route management and provide clear error messages
10. **Route Configuration Validation**: Reject invalid Route termination types and configurations that conflict with Service CA usage
11. **Managed Route Lifecycle**: Handle Route creation, updates, and cleanup based on `managedRoute` flag state

#### Route Creation Implementation

The controller will implement route creation with this pattern:

> ```go

Reviewer: Code block can be removed and details on the choice of re-rencrypt termination policy can be added in corresponding sections.

            },
        },
        Spec: routev1.RouteSpec{
            To: routev1.RouteTargetReference{
                Kind: "Service",
                Name: "spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider",
            },
            Port: &routev1.RoutePort{
                TargetPort: intstr.FromString("https"),
            },
            TLS: &routev1.TLSConfig{
                Termination:                   routev1.TLSTerminationReencrypt,
                InsecureEdgeTerminationPolicy: routev1.InsecureEdgeTerminationPolicyRedirect,
            },
        },
    }
}
```

#### Service CA Integration

The controller will add automatic certificate provisioning by annotating the OIDC discovery provider service:

```yaml
# Service annotation for automatic certificate provisioning via Service CA
annotations:
  service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name: oidc-serving-cert
```

This enables OpenShift's Service CA operator to automatically:
- Generate and provision TLS certificates for the service
- Create the `oidc-serving-cert` secret containing the certificate and private key
- Manage certificate lifecycle including renewal
- Establish trust with the cluster's Certificate Authority

> As part of this change, the `spiffe-helper` container will be removed from the `spire-oidc-discovery-provider` deployment, because the Service CA operator will provide the serving certificate directly to the OIDC discovery provider pod via the generated secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of this change, the `spiffe-helper` container will be removed from the `spire-oidc-discovery-provider` deployment to optimize flow for attestation and remove dependency on certificates generated by spire server for `spire-oidc-discovery-provider` endpoints. `spire-oidc-discovery-provider` will use ceritficates managed by Service CA operator. The workload attestation is performed by spire agent when `spire-oidc-discovery-provider` requests for JWKS bundle using workload api socket. 
```

#### Status Conditions and Events Implementation

The controller will provide comprehensive status reporting for troubleshooting:

1. **Status Conditions**:
   - `SpireOIDCManagedRouteGeneration`: Condition holds the value regarding the oidc routes status and reasons.

>    - `status`: Reports the condition status as true or false.

Reviewer: `status` is not a condition.

   - `SpireOIDCManagedRouteCreationSucceeded`: signifies that the routes creation has been succeded.
   - `SpireOIDCRouteCreationDisabled`: signifies that the managed routes creation has been disabled.
   - `SpireOIDCManagedRouteCreationFailed`: signifies that managed routes creation has failed. putting the error message in the `message` field.

> 2. **Event Generation**:

Reviewer: Conditions and events need to refined to overcome ambiguity in the different conditions.

#### TLS Security and Validation

Re-encrypt termination is the only supported termination type to ensure end-to-end TLS encryption from external clients to the backend service. This approach maintains complete encryption throughout the request path with no unencrypted traffic within the cluster, providing dual-layer certificate validation at the router. The controller implements strict validation, reconciling routes with edge or passthrough termination to prevent security-compromising configurations.

From an operational perspective, re-encrypt termination integrates seamlessly with OpenShift's Service CA operator for automatic certificate lifecycle management, eliminating manual certificate management burden while providing transparent updates without service disruption. This leverages OpenShift's built-in certificate infrastructure rather than requiring external PKI management.

#### Route Lifecycle and Status Management

> The controller manages Route lifecycle based on the `managedRoute` flag with owner references for automatic garbage collection. When enabled, Routes are created automatically with secure defaults. When disabled, the controller stops managing Routes but preserves existing configurations (per non-goals). Re-enabling management adopts compatible existing Routes or creates new ones.

Author: CC: @PillaiManish

> The controller manages Route lifecycle based on the `managedRoute` flag with owner references for automatic garbage collection. When enabled, Routes are created automatically with secure defaults. When disabled, the controller stops managing Routes but preserves existing configurations (per non-goals). Re-enabling management adopts compatible existing Routes or creates new ones.

Reviewer 2: @TrilokGeer how can we identity the existing routes - which are created by user's by different name? One thing we can do is, let the controller create the managedRoute but it won't be admitted due to host conflict, and the same status can be shown in CR's status field.

However, administrators must understand that orphaned Routes require manual cleanup if they are no longer desired. The operator's uninstallation documentation must include specific commands for identifying and removing these resources to prevent accumulation of unused Routes over time.

#### Upgrade Scenarios and Version Compatibility

Since the operator is currently a tech-preview operator the upgrades are not supported.

#### Operational Constraints

Routes follow a fixed naming pattern that cannot be customized by administrators, ensuring consistent identification and management by the controller across different environments and operator versions.

The namespace scoping constraint means Routes are always created in the same namespace as their corresponding oidc application resource.

> Route functionality maintains a strict dependency on the underlying `spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider` service. If this service becomes unavailable or is misconfigured, the Route will continue to exist but will fail to serve OIDC discovery traffic, potentially causing confusion during troubleshooting. Administrators should monitor both Route and service health as part of their operational procedures.

Reviewer: What happens when the  `spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider` service is not ready and `RouteReady` condition is true and user updates the hostname?

Author: AFAIK service does not have a Ready status because it is an abstract networking resource, not a workload or runtime component like a pod. they route traffic to matching backend pods, readiness is evaluated at the pod level, and traffic is only sent to pods marked as "ready" via associated endpoints. 

If the underlying workload is not ready, they would be unreachable. it would not matter user updates any of the field. 
if managedRoute field is enabled and user tries to update the hostname on routes resource itself that does not match the jwt isswer field the operator will try to reconcile the route.

Reviewer: >if managedRoute field is enabled and user tries to update the hostname on routes resource itself that does not match the jwt isswer field the operator will try to reconcile the route.
Can you add this context?
